first pass at positioning jwt vc as an sd-jwt vc without selectively disclosable claims (#131)
vcstuff/draft-terbu-sd-jwt-vc: draft-terbu-sd-jwt-vc.md

.# Abstract

This specification describes data formats as well as validation and processing

> rules to express Verifiable Credentials based on the Selective Disclosure

Reviewer: why do we even need to change this?

Reviewer 2: while this might be technically correct, I agree it might be confusing to first time readers. Either reverse to:
"based on the SD-JWT (Selective Disclosure for JWT and JWS with JSON payloads) format"
or leave it as is, as the full title is gehind the reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rules to express Verifiable Credentials with JSON payloads based on the Selective Disclosure
```

Author: because I think acronyms should be expanded when used the first time. we are deep in the details, but many do not know what SD-JWT is when they see it for the first time. and we should not assume that anyone reading this already knows what SD-JWT is.

Reviewer 3: I guess this should be aligned with: https://github.com/vcstuff/draft-terbu-sd-jwt-vc/pull/132

Author: let's bikeshed the title in this PR for what is in scope for this PR. and then see if it is aligned or not with #132.

Reviewer 3: I believe it is important to clarify what the specification is trying to achieve.
JWS: compact or JSON serialised JWS -> protection mechanism + serialisation
SD-JWT: SD-JWT serialisation (JWS+disclosures+tilde) or JSON serialised JWS -> protection mechanism + serialisation --> note that this could be fixed if the SD authors agree to. Issue is still open, a viable proposal is on the table.
JWT: compact serialised JWS -> claim set + protection
id token -> JWT + rules for the claims -> claim set + verification rules + protection

If I understand correctly, this specification defines a profile for Verifiable Credentials with the JWT claims set. So
vc+jwt -> claim set (VC + JWT claims), verification rules + protection (JWS or SD-JWT)

If my understanding is correct and if the specification is defining a new type, like in #132: vc+jwt, the specification can be defined as:
Verifiable Credential with JWT claims and protected by JWS (any serialisation) and/or SD-JWT

Or define a new brand:
- Verifiable Web Tokens (I prefer this one)
- JSON Verifiable Credentials
- JSON Web Credentials
- Verifiable Credential Tokens (don't like this one)

I agree with @selfissued  that "with JSON" payloads is clumsy/confusing.

Author: I don't think things to be that complicated...

Bottomline, there is a need for a credential format that uses JWT claim set in the payload, and depending on the use-case there may or may not be a need for selective disclosure. To achieve that we are exploring two approaches:
1. define a credential format without SD based on JWT RFC (JWT VC) and with SD based on the IETF SD-JWT draft (SD-JWT VC) - PR #120
2. define a credential format based on IETF SD-JWT that can be with or without SD (SD-WT VC) - PR #131

that's it.

Author: from what I have observed, majority seems to be favorable towards the approach in PR #131, because it gives one credential format and not two (consolidation, yay!), with one major discussion point being a `~` after a JWT VC when it is issued. 

a bit of the context... this trailing `~` is the result of the decision being taken in SD-JWT spec to better align the issuance and presentation formats, ([this PR](https://github.com/oauth-wg/oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt/pull/293) does it, and it has not been merged yet). One option is to keep issuance and presentation formats separate in SD-JWT (as-is) so that there is no `~` when (SD-)JWT VC is issued. but that is not that clean from a pure SD-JWT processing perspective is I think the opinion of its authors (@danielfett, @bc-pi). 

so the question is really what to do with a trailing `~` when there is no SD in SD-JWT based VC.

Reviewer 3: Hi @Sakurann . I agree that id doesn't have to be that complicated. IMO 2nd approach is cleaner as you can clearly split the data model and protection mechanisms.
See:
> If I understand correctly, this specification defines a profile for Verifiable Credentials with the JWT claims set. So
> vc+jwt -> claim set (VC + JWT claims), verification rules + protection (JWS or SD-JWT)

From your answer I understand you agree with "his specification defines a profile for Verifiable Credentials with the JWT claims set"
From design perspective, proposal 2 is better. Having a data model that depends on the signature format has limited re-usability. Let's assume a new signature or SD for JWT format is introduced. Would this required new data model specifications?

> for JWT (SD-JWT) [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt] format.

Author: ```suggestion
for JWTs (SD-JWT) [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt] format.
```

> for JWT and JWS with JSON payloads (SD-JWT) format [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for JWT (SD-JWT) format [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt].
```

Reviewer 4: I agree that the "with JSON payloads" wording is clunky and should go.  All JWTs have JSON payloads, so we don't need to say so in the title.

Reviewer 4: Also, see https://github.com/vcstuff/draft-terbu-sd-jwt-vc/pull/132, which requests a parallel change to the title.

Author: #132 should be addressed after we have clarity on direction whether #120 or #131. 
jfyi "Selective Disclosure for JWT and JWS with JSON payloads (SD-JWT)" is a new spec title for SD-JWT, and "JWS with JSON payloads" is meant to cater for JSON serialization which is not allowed in JWT>

Reviewer 5: The full (and admittedly clunky) title of SD-JWT doesn't need to be spelled out here though.  (and ugh we should have capitalized Payloads in that title)  
```suggestion
for JWT (SD-JWT) [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt] format.
```

> It can be used when there are no selective disclosable claims, too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: I agree that the supported securing mechanisms should be explicit.

Should the specification define which claims can be hidden and which not when SD is applied? e.g., iss, exp, nbf, cnf is probably conditional.

Reviewer 2: This is already the case.
> If present, the following registered JWT claims MUST be included in the SD-JWT and MUST NOT be included in the Disclosures, i.e. cannot be selectively disclosed:

Reviewer: I don't think it needs to be highlighted in the introduction. Rationale is sufficient in my opinion.

Author: in other issue.

(The Verifier can also serve as the Status Provider.)

This specification defines Verifiable Credentials based on the SD-JWT
format with a JWT Claim Set.
format with a JWT Claim Set. It can be used when there are no selective disclosable claims, too.

## Rationale

JSON Web Tokens (JWTs) [@!RFC7519] can in principle be used to express
Verifiable Credentials in a way that is easy to understand and process as it
builds upon established web primitives. While JWT-based credentials enable selective
disclosure, i.e., the ability for a Holder to disclose only a subset of the contained
claims, in an Identity Provider ecosystem by issuing new JWTs to the Verifier for

> every presentation, this approach does not work in the three-party-model.

Reviewer 2: I actually like this section as it gives rationale for the issuer-holder-verifier model

Reviewer: I think this section distracts from the real topic.

bounds defined by the Issuer).

> SD-JWT itself does not define the claims that must be used within the payload or

Reviewer: suggest to reorganize this paragraph 
Move 2nd and 3rd sentence to previous paragraph forward (all related to sd and non sd). Modify 3rd sentence.

"This specification therefore defines how Verifiable Credentials
can be expressed using SD-JWT covering both options, with and without selective disclosure."

1st sentence fits better with the last paragraph as this is about the content. Suggest to add the following sentence between this sentence and the rest: 
"SD-JWT VC defines a content model based on JWT claims."

Reviewer 2: I agree, when the section above is removed, the paragraphs don't really fit together nicely

Author: thanks - I think it reads better now.

> their semantics. SD-JWT can be used when there are no selectively disclosable claims.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their semantics. SD-JWT can also be used when there are no selectively disclosable claims.
```

Author: outdated with torsten's commit.

This specification therefore defines how Verifiable Credentials

> can be expressed using SD-JWT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be expressed using SD-JWT with and without selective disclosure.
```

Author: outdated with torsten's commit.

Additional public claims MAY be used in SD-JWT VCs depending on the
application.

#### SD-JWT VC without selectively disclosable claims

> SD-JWT VC may not contain any selectively disclosable claims.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
SD-JWT VC MAY have no selectively disclosable claims.
```

> In that case, the SD-JWT VC MUST NOT contain the `_sd` claim in the JWT body. I also

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In that case, the SD-JWT VC MUST NOT contain the `_sd` claim in the JWT body. It also
```

> MUST NOT have any Disclosures.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
MUST NOT have any Disclosures. For issuance, the trailing `~` MUST BE omitted from the SD-JWT.
For presentation the trailing `~` MUST BE omitted unless a Key Binding JWT is present.
```

Author: if we keep approach in this PR, `~` needs to stay even when there is no SD.

Additional public claims MAY be used in SD-JWT VCs depending on the
application.

#### SD-JWT VC without selectively disclosable claims

SD-JWT VC may not contain any selectively disclosable claims.
Such SD-JWT VC does not contain `_sd` claim in the JWT body and

> does not have any Disclosures.

Reviewer: out of curiosity - the change to align issuance and presentation format would lead to the fact that non sd VCs would be JWTs + a `~`, right?

Reviewer 2: I guess so, also key binding would be very easy as it is still being appended after ~ in presentation?

Author: aaa that is an important question. It is a little counter intuitive, but if sd-jwt is the basis of jwt vcs ending with Tilde will be more natural and will be a nice differentiator between normal jwts and jwt vcs..?

> Such SD-JWT VC does not contain `_sd` claim in the JWT body and
> does not have any Disclosures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In that case, the SD-JWT VC MUST NOT contain the `_sd` claim in the JWT body and
MUST NOT have any Disclosures.
```

Author: ```suggestion
In that case, the SD-JWT VC MUST NOT contain the `_sd` claim in the JWT body. I also
MUST NOT have any Disclosures.
```

Author: I prefer avoiding two normative requirements (MUST NOTs) in the same sentence.

key from the JWT Issuer Metadata configuration (as defined in
(#jwt-issuer-metadata)) of the SD-JWT VC issuer. A Verifier MAY use alternative
methods to obtain the public key to verify the signature of the SD-JWT.

> If there are no selectively disclosable claims, there is no need to process
> `_sd` claim nor Disclosures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there are no selectively disclosable claims, there is no need to process the
`_sd` claim nor any Disclosures.
```

A presentation of an SD-JWT VC MAY contain a Holder Binding JWT as described in
Section 5.4.1. of [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt].

> When there are no selectively disclosable claims, a presentation of SD-JWT VC
> does not contain any disclosures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When there are no selectively disclosable claims, a presentation of SD-JWT VC
does not contain any Disclosures.
```

# Acknowledgements {#Acknowledgements}

> We would like to thank Alen Horvat, Andres Uribe, Brian Campbell, Christian Bormann,
> Giuseppe De Marco, Michael Jones, Mike Prorock, Orie Steele, Paul Bastian,
> Torsten Lodderstedt, Tobias Looker and Kristina Yasuda for their contributions
> (some of which substantial) to this draft and to the initial set of implementations.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We would like to thank
Alen Horvat,
Andres Uribe,
Brian Campbell,
Christian Bormann,
Giuseppe De Marco,
Michael Jones,
Mike Prorock,
Orie Steele,
Paul Bastian,
Torsten Lodderstedt,
Tobias Looker, and
Kristina Yasuda
for their contributions (some of which substantial) to this draft and to the initial set of implementations.
```
